---
layout: post
title:  "Perl5 -> Perl6: read and write to files"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- raku
- perl
- programming
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
A simple snippet about some idiom I carry on from my Perl 5 day-to-day work

## Perl5 -> Perl6: read and write to files
-----

A real common task in my day-to-day programmer activity is to *filter* some input file producing one or more output file.
To some extent, it is the famouse **REPL** way of doing things: *R*ead, *E*valuate, *P*rint and *L*oop.

The basic idiom is to read, line by line, the input file and print the output file with some kind of separator and begin/trail
string. A classic example could be having an SQL command as begin, comma separated values and a commit as end.

What is the skeleton of this piece of code in Perl 5? As simple as:

``` perl
 open my $input, "<", $ARGV[ 0 ] || die "\nError!\n$!\n";
 open my $output, ">", $output_file_name  || die "\nError!\n$!\n";
 while ( <$input> ){
     chomp;
     my @fields = map{ s/'//g;   s/^\"|\"$/'/g; s/'\s+/'/g; s/\s+'/'/g; $_  } split ',';
     say { $output } $begin_separator,
                     join( $separator, @fields ),
                     $end_separator;
 }

 close $output;
```

Simple enough pal? Open the ```$output``` and ```$input``` file handles, iterate one line at time (lazily) over the input file, do some kind of
mangling (including *chomping*), split and re-```map``` the fields and print one line on the output file.


How to the same in Perl 6? This is a possible solution:

``` perl
 my $ofh = $output.IO.open :w;
 for $input.IO.lines -> $line {
     my @fields = $line.split( ',' ).map: -> $_ is copy
                 { s:g/^\"||\"$/\'/; s:g/^\'\s+||\s\'+$/\'/; $_ };
     $ofh.say( $begin_separator, @fields.join( $separator ), $end_separator );
 }

$ofh.close;

```

A lot shorter, isn't it?
First of all the output file handle is opened in write mode, and while I could use ```spurt``` to print out a line on the file, that will
close the file at each iteration, so I believe it is better to keep the handle around.
The ```for``` loop performs the reading lazily, and the line is split and mapped. Please note that this time operators are read from left
to right and not viceversa! In Perl 5 you would read *map* and *split*, while here you read *split* and *map*; in both cases the latter
is the sequence of operations performed at run-time.
Note also that **$_ has to be marked as writable** ([thanks to Timo](https://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl6.users/2017/09/msg4317.html))
because [block and method arguments are *read-only* by default](https://docs.perl6.org/type/Signature#index-entry-trait_is_copy-trait_is_rw-Parameter_Traits_and_Modifiers).
Last, the usual print and join combo to put the line on the output file.
