---
layout: post
title:  "Update sudo!"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- sudo
- linux
- freebsd
- Open Source
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
How hard can it be?

# Update sudo!

So, now news, `sudo` had a [very astonishing bug](https://www.sudo.ws/alerts/minus_1_uid.html): you can gain access as superuser specifying a negative *user ID*. 
<br/>
Now, first of all, no flame and no panic: this works only if you are allowed to run `ALL` commands.
<br/>
A little more panic: many (Linux) distributions do configure the main user with an `ALL** command alias, and therefore are vulnerable.
<br/>
**Versions before `1.8.28` are affected, and therefore upgrades are required.**
<br/>
I decided to have a look at my systems, to see how to upgrade.

### Kubuntu

My Kubuntu machines were running `1.8.23` (gosh!). Since I'm on Kubuntu 18.10 (not LTS!), it seems I cannot update it [without upgrading my systems](https://usn.ubuntu.com/4154-1/), and the page references that my distro is not affected while it is (obviously).

### FreeBSD

My FreeBSD machines were running `1.8.27`, truly the most updated version around all my systems.
Issuing a `pkg upgrade` proposed me `sudo` as an upgrade, so I got the new shiny version running.

### Fedora

My Fedora 30 machine gets updated easily with the new version of sudo.

### CentOS

My CentOS `7.5` is running `1.8.23` and there's no automatic upgrade.


## Conclusions

Again, I'm not much impressed by the Ubuntu way of handling updates. And I'm positively impressed by how FreeBSD handles them precisely.
I don't have enough experience to judge Fedora nor CentOS, but let's say the former sounds to me a little better in this particular case.
<br/>
<br/>
So what I have to do after all? Upgrade as much binaries as possible, or compile a new `sudo** version by my own!
*At least I got my system patched*!
