---
layout: post
title:  "The World is going to change (again)! Perl 7 has been announced!"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- perl
- raku
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
Yesterday there was a quite incredible announcement!

# The World is going to change (again)! Perl 7 has been announced!

This [post by brain d foy](https://www.perl.com/article/announcing-perl-7/){:target="_blank"} caught my attention, and it could not be anyway else: **Perl 7 has been announced**!
<br/>
<br/>
Ok, now breathe.
<br/>
**This means we are going to throw into the trash everything we know about Perl 6!**
<br/>
No, **I'm kidding**!
<br/>
<br/>
So what is really happening?
<br/>

# Between **5** and **7** there is **raku**

A long time ago, I think around Perl `5.8` there was the idea of developing a new version of Perl that would break the backward compatibility Perl is very good at, so good I don't have any other example of a programming language being so resilient across the years.
<br/>
When you want to make it clear that you are going to break the backward compatibility, what do you do? *You change your major version number*, and the same happened to Perl so that the idea of `Perl 6` took place.
<br/>
<br/>
Long story short: Perl 6 was taking too much to complete, and therefore Perl 5 development was continued in what I would call *smart mantainance*. Perl 5 was not *simply* under mantainance, but new cool features were added during the years, so that *Perl 6 and Perl 5 become siste languages rather than one the evolution of the other*.
<br/>
Then there was a very long discussion about the name changing: since *Perl 5* was still actively developed and *Perl 6* was not its evolution, the development group decided to change the name of *Perl 6* to **Raku**.
<br/>
<br/>
So, let me stress it again: **Raku and Perl are not the same language**!
<br/>
<br/>
However, sooner or later, Perl (5) have to break compatibility and evolve.
<br/>
And here it comes **Perl 7**.
<br/>
<br/>
The following are my own thoughts about, please note that since I was not able to listen to the announcement, I could be wrong on some of the followings.

## How many Perl languages are we going to have?

I believe that, apart from the transitional period, we will end up with two languages: **Raku** and **Perl**.
The latter will be meant to be **Perl 7**, so when you will end up developing in old Perl you will probably say *Perl 5* as today you could speak about *Perl 4*.

## What about Perl 5?

Perl 5, or better, *"Perl as we know it today"* is going to be in *long-term maintanance*, that is a fancy way to say it will live for another decade or so.

## What about legacy code?

I guess sooner or later you will end up either adjusting your code to the newer Perl or to keep a Perl 5 release around.


## Why not evolving Raku?

Raku and Perl are, today, different languages with the same (or similar) mindset and approach.
<br/>
Perl 7 is the natural evolution of Perl 5, Raku is a different implementation of the Perl culture.

## What is Perl 7, practically?

Perl 7 is, as of today, `Perl 5.32` with a different *default setup* out of the box.
The idea is to progressively mgirate the developers and users to different features of the language removing awkward and old compatibilities.
<br/>
And then to evolve from there.

## When?

According to the [post by brain d foy](https://www.perl.com/article/announcing-perl-7/){:target="_blank"} is it going to happen the next year. Development has already started.


## Headaches?

Yes, I suspect this numbering change will produce some confusions in people out of the Perl community.
