---
layout: post
title:  "Eclipse Frozen: the strange case of the SSD disk"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- eclipse
- planet-kde-org
- ssd
- linux
- smart-working
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
I lost almost three days trying to figure out why my computer was freezing...

# Eclipse Frozen: the strange case of the SSD disk

It started on Thursday of the last week: while I was happily developing within Eclipse my home computer got frozen, nothing was responding, including the Plasma desktop. After a couple of minutes, I rebooted the computer, increased the amount of memory related to Eclipse and started working again.
<br/>
<br/>
On the next Monday I got the same behavior, again while working within Eclipse. I'm not a big fan of Eclipse anymore, I believe it is too much *huge* nowdays, and so I blamed Eclipse `2019-12` as the responsible of this whole Plasma desktop freeze.
I then tried, after a reboot, to keep Eclipse resources at a miminum, for example closing not interesting projects, but with an increasing frequency, the computer was freezing and I was getting nervous.
<br/>
I then start digging into the Eclipse workspace logs, without any success. Also the Linux logs were not reporting anything, the computer simply stopped working.
<br/>
In the meantime I have experienced slowing computer performances, and I've noted hat only `2 GB`s out of my `240 GB`s Solid State Disk were left. I therefore decided to trash some stuff to make more room on the disk, and the computer immediatly started to behave better.
<br/>
But then, again, it froze.
<br/>
<br/>
As a last resort, I tried to update Eclipse from `2019-12` to `2020-03`, a couple of time without any success.
<br/>
I then started to move my stuff out from the hme folder to another partition (on the same disk) in the hope to get it resuming its performances.
<br/>
<br/>
But here the clue: while `rsync`ing content, in particular a quite large `git` project, the computer froze again.
<br/>
Could it be something related to `git`? Quick, run `git gc` on the project! And in fact the project was moved to another partition easily, so that mademe hope again I found and fixed the problem, that appeared to be due to `git` misbehaving in Eclipse and on the filesystem.
<br/>
But the very next day, another freeze.
<br/>
Ok, enough for me: get rid of Eclipse! Let's install Netbeans.
<br/>
But I was unable to complete the installation, since the computer was freezing every time I attempted to run the installer.
<br/>
<br/>
Ok, there was nothing remaining except the hard disk drive. My **Sandisk SSD 240 GB** was misbehaving after only two years of usage.
<br/>
So, here I'm removing the hard disk and substituting it with another SSD, reinstalling the operating sysem from scratch and hoping this can be a solution.

## It is not as simple as it is

Reinstalling an operating system from scratch is a very long activity: you have to reconfigure the whole system.
<br/>
But luckily I placed the old SSD disk into a container and attached it via USB: I was able to restore pretty much everything in a matter of hours (yes, USB 1!). And the Sandisk SSD was always working, I suspect *USB was not pushing pressure on the data bus*.
<br/>
Of course, the hardest part was to remember how to unlock my encrypted home folder, but thanks to `ecryptfs-recover-pivate` I was able to unlock the content and get back many of my settings, including `git` repositories not yet pushed!
