---
layout: post
title:  "Oh my Glob!"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- perl5
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
I found an awkward program of mine doing some nasty usage of typeglobs!

# Oh my Glob!

Last day I was seeking for an old program of mine, something I remember I wrote in Perl when I was a very baby-Perl programmer (today is much different, *I'm a child Perl programmer!*).
<br/>
Long story short: I did not find (yet) such program, but in the meantime [I found this ancient and embarassing script I wrote pretty much 20 years ago](https://github.com/fluca1978/fluca1978-coding-bits/blob/master/perl/addHostsEntry.pl){:target="_blank"}. I don't even remember why did I had to write such a stupid program, I guess I was experimenting with something more powerful of the Unix Shell back at that time.
<br/>
Anyway, the program had a couple of lines that get my attention:

```perl
open(FILE,">>".$HOST_FILE) || ($FILE = 0);

if( $FILE == 0 ){
    warn("\nWriting to stdout (maybe you don't have permissions to open $HOST_FILE?)\n");
    *FILE = *STDOUT;
}

# ... much more code later ...
print FILE "\n$address $host $relative_host\t# automatically added by addHostsEntry.pl";
```

*Argh!*<br/>
I was using **typeglob assignment**, *poor me little bastard*!
<br/>
Essentially, the line `*FILE = *STDOUT;` is assigning to the *typeglob* `FILE` the same thing as the global typeglob `STDOUT`, that means that `FILE` is a synonim for `STDOUT`, with the latter being the *standard output* (i.e., the console).
<br/>
That was ancient Perl, since thanks to the reference machinery, typeblogs can be pretty much avoided unles you need to do some sort of black magic (like aliasing a symbol table, importing or overriding methods, and so on).
The documentation clearly states it:

```shell
% perldoc perldata
...
    Another use for typeglobs is to pass filehandles into a function or to
    create new filehandles. If you need to use a typeglob to save away a
    filehandle, do it this way:

        $fh = *STDOUT;

    or perhaps as a real reference, like this:

        $fh = \*STDOUT;

```

I guess my stupid usage was due to the fact that the horrible translation of the *Camel Book* I had at that time did not explain very well how to *not abuse* of typeglobs. And, back in those days, I was too lazy to read the online documentation.
<br/>
So yes, that were two errors in a row!
