---
layout: post
title:  "Compute the max in Java: how ugly can it be?"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- java
- raku
- programming
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
How ugly the code can quickly become in Java due to the lack of operators.

# Compute the max in Java: how ugly can it be?

The problem is simple: we need to compute the `max` among a bunch (more than two) integer values. Let's assume I need to compute it over three values, `a`, `b` and `c`:

<br/>
<br/>
```java
int computedMax = Math.max( a,
                     Math.max( b, c ) );
```
<br/>
<br/>

In the above piece of code, there are two nested function call to the static method `max`. That's ugly because if you add other values, you need to add more nested function call too.
<br/>
And before complaining, yes, there are a few ways to make the code simpler. Such way ranges from statically import the method (so that `Math.max` can be simply written as `max`), build a list and use an external library (e.g., `Collections.max`), and so on.
<br/>
But the real problem remains: Java have no builtin reduction operator, as well as it has no way to quickly aggregate scalars into structures (e.g., arrays or lists).
<br/>
How does Raku implements this? It is as simple as:

<br/>
<br/>
```raku
max $a, $b, $c;
```
<br/>
<br/>

Now, `max` in Raku is not a reduction operator, rather a method that accepts a list, and the *comma operator* builds a list. This in short, is the explaination why the above code works and why adding other values does not make the code less readable.
<br/>
<br/>
This is the real topic behind this example: **you can do whatever you want in pretty much any language, but _how you express the alghoritm_ is what makes a language different from another**. And no, providing libraries does not make your language more expressive, it gives you a way to express something long and difficult in a shorter and readable way, but does not change your language.
<br/>
<br/>
You can, of course, find other situations other this simple *max* "problem" where Java requires you to write much code than you really need.
<br/>
It must be noted that *recent* versions of Java provide [a way to *streamline* and *reduce* sequence-like structures](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/collections/streams/index.html#pipelines){:target="_blank"}, even if I don't think they provide the same expressivity that other languages provide.
<br/>


# Conclusions

I think Java is a great language, but it clearly suffers from a few design decisions that are making it more ugly every day.
<br/>
Having experienced other *expressive* languages, I developed hate against Java, even if I'm using in every day development.
