---
layout: post
title:  "New features in pgenv"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- postgresql
- pgenv
- planet-postgresq-org
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
`pgenv` 1.2 introduces a few nice features.

# New features in `pgenv`

[`pgenv`](https://github.com/theory/pgenv){:target="_blank"} is a great tool to simply manage different binary installations of PostgreSQL.
<br/>
It is a shell script, specifically designed for the Bash shell, that provides a single command named `pgenv` that accepts sub-commands to fetch, configure, install, start and stop different PostgreSQL versions on the same machine.
<br/>
It is not designed to be used in production or in an enterprise environment, even if it could, but rather it is designed to be used as a compact and simple way to switch between different versions in order to test applications and libraries.
<br/>
<br/>
In the last few weeks, there has been quite work around `pgenv`, most notably:
- support for multiple configuration flags;
- consistent behavior about configuration files.

<br/>
In the following, I briefly describe each of the above.

# Support for multiple configuration flags

`pgenv` does support configuration files, where you can store shell variables that drive the PostgreSQL build and configuration. One problem `pgenv` had was due to the limitation of the shell environment variables: since they represent a single value, passing multiple values *separated by spaces* was not possible. This made build flags, e.g., `CFLAGS` hard to write if not impossible.
<br/>
Since [this commit](https://github.com/theory/pgenv/commit/e7e289cea8c3a232d51e06af93fc798d01c8a36b){:target="_blank"}, *David* (the original author) introduced the capability to **configure options containing spaces**. The trick was to switch from simple environment variables to Bash arrays, so that the configuration can be written as

<br/>
<br/>
```shell
PGENV_CONFIGURE_OPTIONS=(
    --with-perl
    --with-openssl
    'CFLAGS=-I/opt/local/opt/openssl/include -I/opt/local/opt/libxml2/include'
    'LDFLAGS=-L/opt/local/opt/openssl/lib -L/opt/local/opt/libxml2/lib'
)
```
<br/>
<br/>
where the `CFLAGS` and `LDFLAGS` both contain spaces.
<br/>
To be coherent, this also renamed a lot of `_OPT_` parameters to `_OPTIONS_` to reflect the fact that they now can contain multiple values.


## Consistent behavior about configuration files

`pgenv` exploits a *default configuration file* when no specific PostgreSQL configuration is found.
The idea is that, if you launch PostgreSQL version *x*, an `.pgenv.x.conf` file is searched for, and if not found, the command tries to load the configuration from a default file named `.pgenv.default.conf`.
<br/>
However, when you delete the configuration, the system did remove also the default configuration.
<br/>
Therefore, [since this commit](https://github.com/theory/pgenv/commit/e46d35f5b09a998fddf8bec43a2ac8d6f9fd0402){:target="_blank"}, there is more consistency in the usage of the `config` subcommand.
<br/>
In particular, in order to delete the default configuration you have to specify `config delete defauòt` explicitly, since `config delete` will no more nuke your default configuration.
Moreover, the `config init` command has been added, so that you can *initialize* the configuration and then modify it by means of the `config write` command. Why these two commands? Well, `config init` will create a "default" configuration file from scratch with current default settings, while `config write` will modify the specified configuration.


## There is more...

I'm currently working at another change in the configuration subsystem, so that you can keep all the configuration files into a single directory. The idea is to ease the migration of `pgenv` to a different machine (e.g., a new one), keeping your own configuration.
