---
layout: post
title:  "Java 17 switch statement is totally new! (or is it?)"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- java
- raku
- programming
- perl
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
Java 17 is catching up with all the new stuff from other languages?

# Java 17 switch statement is totally new! (or is it?)

I was taking a glance at [Java 17 `switch` statement documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/language/pattern-matching-switch-expressions-and-statements.html){:target="_blank"}, not because I'm (still) interested in Java evolutions, but because I heard rumors about a new exciting way of using the `switch` statement.
<br/>
<br/>
And rumors were true!
<br/>
Now the `switch` statement not only can evaluated branches on *values*, but also on (scoped) *types*!.
Therefore, you can avoid blocks of code like the following:

<br/>
<br/>

``` java
if ( o instanceof String ) { ... }
else if ( o instanceof List ) { ... }
else if ( o instanceof Integer ) { ... }
```
<br/>
<br/>

refactoring the above as:

<br/>
<br/>

``` java
switch( o ) {
  case String  s :  ... break;
  case List    l :  ... break;
  case Integer i :  ... break;
  default        :  ... break;

```
<br/>
<br/>

The pattern matching variable (e.g., `s`) is scoped to the `case` so there is no need of a block, but **you need to avoid entering another `case` with another pattern matching variable or a compile time error will arise**!
<br/>
<br/>
But where did I see something like that?
<br/>
Oh, gosh, it looks very close to **Raku `given when` as it [is documented here](https://docs.raku.org/language/control#index-entry-control_flow__given-given={:target="_blank"}!
<br/>
Now, sorry guys, but it seems the Raku version is still much more complete and powerful.
<br/>
First of all, it does not requires `break`s. But allows you to "jump" into another branch by means of the special keyword `proceed` that is going to restart from the next `when`.

# Conclusions

It seems to me Java is adding more and more features to become as flexible as other languages are.
<br/>
But I also see how powerful other languages **were** years (if not decades) before Java!
<br/>
Perl and Raku are probably the most complete examples I would spurt on your face.
