---
layout: post
title:  "grep --null"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- linux
- openbsd
- freebsd
- shell
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
A `grep` feature I was not aware of.

# `grep --null`

A few days ago a [commit within OpenBSD](https://marc.info/?l=openbsd-cvs&m=165624097121480&w=2){:target="_blank"} caught my attention: what was this thing about `--null` flag in `grap`?
<br/>
I am an avid user of `grep`, as many of us are when dealing with scripts and files and shells, however I was not aware of the `--null` feature. It turned out that GNU version of `grep` already has such feature, as well as the FreeBSD version, so OpenBSD here was simply catching up.
<br/>
But what is all about? Well, sometimes you have filenames *with a newline at the end*.
<br/>
Let's not discuss about how terrible such an idea is...


## `grep` without the `--null`

Here's a simple example about the effects of having a newline at the end of the filename:

<br/>
<br/>

``` shell
% cat << EOF >! "test.txt
"
Hello
World
EOF

test.c:    sprintf( database, "Hello World!");
test.txt
:World
test.z:world
```
<br/>
<br/>

As you can see, the `test.txt` filename ends with a `\n` newline character, so when we `grep` multiple files (hence `grep` has to print the matching line with the filename prefix), the name of `test.txt` makes the matching line to appear on the very new line (on the other hand, `test.c` works as expected).


## `grep --null`

What is the effect of `--null` option? In order to better understand it, ask `grep` to give us only the list of files that do match:

<br/>
<br/>

``` shell
% grep -i world -l  test.*
test.c
test.txt

test.z
```
<br/>
<br/>

In the output there is an extra new file due to the filename that ends with a newline.
Now add the `--null` flag:


<br/>
<br/>

``` shell
% grep -i world -l --null test.*
test.ctest.txt
test.z
```
<br/>
<br/>

The extra new line has disappeared, and now only the *effective* newline that is part of the filename is present. This is good to feed other beasts, like `xargs`

<br/>
<br/>

``` shell
% grep -i world -l --null test.* | xargs -0 ls -s
4  test.c  4 'test.txt'$'\n'  4  test.z

```
<br/>
<br/>

that without the *no-newline trick* whould have been very confused in interpreting the filename:

<br/>
<br/>

``` shell
% grep -i world -l  test.* | xargs  ls -s
ls: cannot access 'test.txt': No such file or directory
4 test.c  4 test.z

```
<br/>
<br/>

## Why is named `--null`?

C developers mindset here: it *appends a NULL string terminator at the end of the filename instead of the usual `\n`* for a newline.
<br/>
To some extent, this is the equivalent form of `print0` in `find`.
