---
layout: post
title:  "pgenv 1.3.2 is out!"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- postgresql
- planet-postgresql-org
- pgenv
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
A new release of the PostgreSQL virtual environment manager.

# `pgenv` 1.3.2 is out!


Today we [released version 1.3.2 of pgenv](https://github.com/theory/pgenv/releases/tag/v1.3.2){:target="_blank"}, the [binary manager for PostgreSQL](https://github.com/theory/pgenv){:target="_blank"}.
<br/>
This release fixes a quite subtle bug in the handling of the configuration that prevented custom settings to be correctly loaded back into the running system.
*Users are encouraged to upgrade* as soon as possible.

## A description of the problem
 `17bob17` [noticed the issue](https://github.com/theory/pgenv/issues/56){:target="_blank"}: when you edited your configuration file, either the default or a per-version one, and changed settings in a (Bash) array, the configuration was not correctly loaded.
 <br/>
 It took a lot of time to figure out that the problem was not directly in the way the configuration was loaded, rather in the way the configuration was stored.
 <br/>
 When `pgenv` acquired the configuration settings as arrays, it started using `declare -p` as a way to print out a Bash compatible representation of the array, and such representation was stored in the configuration file.
 The problem was that `declare -p` assumes you want to use `declare` back when you re-evaluate the variable (array), and so placed a `declare -a` as the output.
 <br/>
 The configuration is then loaded within the `pgenv_configuration_load` function, and `declare` run into a function has the same effect as `local`, that is it lexically scope the variables. Therefore, as soon as `pgenv_configuration_load` ends its job, the lexically scoped variables are gone and the old (previous) one are kept with their default value. It is a *boring masquerading problem due to inner contexts*.
 <br/>
 One possible solution could have been to use `-g` as a flag to `declare`, so to force the variable to be global and therefore not lexically scoped, but such flag is not everywhere in different Bash versions and implementation.
 <br/>
 The `-x` flag to declare, to export the variable, did not have any effect too.
 <br/>
 <br/>
 Therefore, the current release removes the use of `declare` at all when the configuration is sourced back (loaded).
