---
layout: post
title:  "Java main Evolution (or not?)"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- java
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
New changes into the most used method ever.

# Java main Evolution (or not?)

The [JEP 445](https://openjdk.org/jeps/445){:target="_blank"} introduces a preview change to the way Java recognizes a `main` method.

While I don't believe this a great change, nor a needed one, apparently the `main` method is something new developers cannot deal with. And I have proofs about this, since no student seems to be able to write a `main` without a signature error.

Despite the above, and my personal considerations, Java is going to support some changes to the `main` method, that so far has to be:
- `static`, not an instance method;
- `public`, visibile from anywhere;
- `void`, cannot return any value;
- accepting a `String[]` single parameter.

Changes made include:
- **unnamed classes** that is a source unit (a file) could avoid the declaration of a class;
- **remove mandatory arguments** so that `main` can skip the `String[]` argument;
- **allows for instance `main` method**, so that the method does no more require `public` nor `static`.


Therefore, while you should write:

<br/>
<br/>
```java
public class Main {
  public static void main( String a[] ) { ... }
}
```
<br/>
<br/>

you can now write the following:

<br/>
<br/>
```java
void main() { ... }
```
<br/>
<br/>




**Great job Java: you are catching up C!**

Let's see how the code changes:

<br/>
<br/>
```java
public class Main {  // removed by unnamed classes

  public static // removed by instance main
         void main( /* String args[] */ ) { ... }

} // removed by unnamed classes
```
<br/>
<br/>


I don't like the idea at all.
After all, it is not such a big deal to write a fine `main` method, so I don't see why there is the need to refactor the launching protocol to handle this changes. In fact, in order for the JVM to understand which main method to run, the launching protocol has to be changed accordingly, and quite frankly I believe that newcomers and students will be confused by different `main` methods. As an example, consider the following:

<br/>
<br/>
```java
public class Main {
   public static void main( String a[] ) { ... }
   void main() { ... }
}
```
<br/>
<br/>

In the above, only one `main` is executed, and that depends on the JVM launching protocol.

But is it clearer to a newcomers what happens?


I don't think so...
