---
layout: post
title:  "pgenv version 1.3.3 released"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- postgresql
- planet-postgresql-org
- pgenv
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
A new release for the PostgreSQL binary manager.

# pgenv version 1.3.3 released

[pgenv release 1.3.3](https://github.com/theory/pgenv/releases/tag/v1.3.3){:target="_blank"} is now available.

This release introduces two main environment variables to instrument the application about configuration files.

The first variable is `PGENV_CONFIGURATION_FILE`: such variable can be set to *force* `pgenv` to use a custom configuration file without having to *guess* which file to use depending on the specific PostgreSQL version in use.
By default, `pgenv` looks for a configuration file named after the PostgreSQL version, or if not found, a `default.conf` configuration file. Using the above variable, it is now possible to pass information to `pgenv` about where a configuration is, and **this allows for the same configuration file to be used over and over without any regard to the PostgreSQL version**.

<br/>
<br/>
```shell
% export PGENV_CONFIGURATION_FILE=~/git/dot-files/pgenv/luca.conf

% pgenv rebuild 16.0
Using PGENV_ROOT /home/luca/git/pgenv
[DEBUG] Configuration file forced by environment variable PGENV_CONFIGURATION_FILE = /home/luca/git/dot-files/pgenv/luca.conf
[DEBUG] Configuration file forced by environment variable PGENV_CONFIGURATION_FILE = /home/luca/git/dot-files/pgenv/luca.conf
[DEBUG] Looking for configuration in /home/luca/git/dot-files/pgenv/luca.conf

...

```
<br/>
<br/>

As you can see, `pgenv` will now use the specified configuration file.


The other variable added is `PGENV_WRITE_CONFIGURATION_FILE_AUTOMATICALLY`, that if set to a *false* value (e.g., `0`, `no`) will prevent `pgenv` to write or overwrite a configuration file once a `build` or `rebuild` is completed. The normal behavior is to let `pgenv` to write/overwrite the configuration file if this variable is not set at all or is set to a true value (e.g., `1`, `yes`), and this is the behavior of previos releases. Since today, if you set this variable to a false value, `pgenv` will not create (nor overwrite) a configuration file at the end of a build phase.

<br/>
<br/>
```shell
% export PGENV_WRITE_CONFIGURATION_FILE_AUTOMATICALLY=no
% pgenv rebuild 16.0
...
[DEBUG] Not writing config file automatically: set `PGENV_WRITE_CONFIGURATION_FILE_AUTOMATICALLY` to a true value to enable the automatic file writing
PostgreSQL 16.0 built

```
<br/>
<br/>

As you see from the above, `pgenv` will complain it cannot write the configuration file for this build.
Thanks to this option, you will be sure your carefully crafted configuration file will never be overwritten accidentally (please note that `pgenv` always make a backup copy before overwriting an existing file).

Last, the new subcommand `config path` has been added: the idea is to show to the user where `pgenv` expects to find a configuration file and what is going to use without any custom changes.

<br/>
<br/>
```shell
% pgenv config path
Using PGENV_ROOT /home/luca/git/pgenv
/home/luca/git/pgenv/config/default.conf


```
<br/>
<br/>
