---
layout: post
title:  "pgagroal 1.6.0 has been released"
author: Luca Ferrari
tags:
- postgresql
- planet-postgresql-org
permalink: /:year/:month/:day/:title.html
---
pgagroal, the fast connection pooler for PostgreSQL, has reached a new stable release!

# pgagroal 1.6.0 has been released

A couple of days ago, [pgagroal](https://github.com/agroal/pgagroal/releases/tag/1.6.0){:target="_blank"} version `1.6.0` has been released.

This new version includes a lot of new features and small improvements that make `pgagroal` much more user-friendly and ease to adopt as a conenction pooler. The main contribution, from yours truly, has been **command line refactoring** and **JSON support**.
Now the command line supports *commands and subcommands*, like for example `conf get` and `conf set`, and a more consistent set of commands.
The JSON command output allows for an ease automation and a stable command output, so to ease the adoption in different scenarios.

But there's more: a lot of other tickets have been solved during this release, and there is now support fo Mac OSX. Moreover, it is now possible to retrieve and set configuration values at run-time, thus without the need to manually editing the configuration file and reloading the daemon.

There is an initial exeperimental support for client certificates, and now it is possible to determine how long a connection must live.

A better handling of the configuration files, hence a better detection and reporting of misconfiguration, as well as a better error messaging system, completes the release.

The list of contributors is also expanding, and this is good and exciting!

Give `pgagroal` a try, you will be amazed by the capabilities of this connection pooler!
